In a previous video, we introduced some of
the basic commands used in SQL queries.
We also explored column and row filtering
operations using the select, from, and
where commands.
In this video, we're going to
focus on data aggregations in SQL,
using the group by command, filtering on
aggregate values using the having command,
and sorting data using
the order by command.
So what do we mean when
we say data aggregations?
An aggregation basically takes
the values in multiple rows of data and
returns one value.
Effectively collapsing all
those rows into a single row
containing a measure of interest.
In the world of SQL we're really talking
about one of the following types of
familiar operations.
Each of which operates on a table field.
The sum function calculates the arithmetic
sum across the sum of field values.
Similarly, the average or
AVG function calculates the average
across the sum of field values.
Both the sum and average functions require
that the data in the field be numeric.
They won't work on other types
of data like strings or dates.
This is not the case for the min and the
max functions, which return the minimum or
maximum values from a set of field values.
The min and max functions will work
with most data types, including numbers,
strings, or dates.
The count function, returns the number
of values present in a field of values.
Some SQL versions provide a few more
options for aggregate functions.
But the ones we introduced here are pretty
universal across all versions you're
likely to encounter.
For all these functions
the syntax is similar.
I have the function name immediately
followed by the field name in parenthesis.
They also work pretty much as you
think they would, with one caveat.
There's a special type of value that
can exist within a field called a null.
A null basically represents
the absence of data.
In other words there is
no value in that field.
It shouldn't be confused with a zero or
a blank value.
Which are actually real values
in American text fields.
This distinction is important,
because aggregate functions treat nulls
differently than they do other values.
Specifically all aggregate
values ignore nulls except for
one special case of the count function.
If we use the wild card character
star in our count function,
we return the number of rows in a data set
whether or not there are nulls present.
That means that if I use count
field name and count star
I'll get two different answers if there
are nulls in the fields of interest.
Now that we've covered the types of
aggregate functions available to us,
let's talk about how we
use them in queries.
If we're interested in aggregate
values across an entire table,
the syntax is pretty simple.
We just use an aggregate function instead
of a field name in our select statement.
For example, consider the transactions
table we introduced in a previous video.
Since each row represents one transaction,
if we wanted to count the total number of
transactions from the table
we'd use this query.
As you can see we just select
count star from transactions.
When we run this code we get
the following which tells me
there are nine rows in this table.
Depending on the specific version of
SQL you are using the query may or
may not return a column name for
the aggregation in the output data set.
In this case the column
name might be blank, or
it might be the whole function COUNT(*).
SQL Does provide us a way to specify or
change a column name in our query through
the use of something called an alias.
Let's say that we wanted to call the
number of rows in the transactions table
num_rows.
We could write a query
that looks like this.
Here I have select count(*) as
num_rows from transactions.
The as modifier tells the SQL engine
that I want to rename a field
as something else.
Running this query return
the same result as before
except that the column of
the output set is now NUM_ROWS.
The use of aliases is not
limited to aggregate functions.
I can rename any field to
something else if I want to.
We can also use aliases to
rename tables in our queries.
But we'll cover that in a later video.
As a side note, I'm using the underscore
character in my alias because SQL expects
column and table names to be
a continuous set of characters,
meaning I can't use spaces or
most punctuation marks in those names.
If you put a space between words in a
table name, the SQL engine will interpret
it as two separate things and
will most likely produce an error.
So again we can use any of these
aggregate functions on the whole table.
However a much more common use of
aggregate is in conjunction with the group
by statement.
As the name suggests, the group by
statement allows me to group data and
provide summary aggregates for each group.
Conceptually the way this works is
that I choose some way to group data
that is based on one or
more of the fields in my table.
then i determine what aggregates
I want based on one or
more other fields in my table.
The syntax of the SQL
code looks like this.
Here I select some number of grouping
fields followed by some number of
aggregates, all separated by commas,
like any other select state.
The from clause is the same as
our previous queries, with from,
followed by the table name.
But now I add a third line, with group by,
followed by the same grouping
fields I used in the select statement,
also separated by commas.
The important thing to note about
this syntax is that anything in
the select statement that's
not an aggregate function
must also appear in
the group by statement.
Let's see how this works with an example
using our transaction's table.
Suppose that I'm interested in products
and I want a few different aggregates
grouped by product, namely the total
number of purchases by product.
The total dollar value
of purchases by product.
And the average dollar value
We saw earlier that we can get the total
number of purchases in our table by using
the COUNT (*) function.
To get the total dollar values of
purchases or use the sum function on
the price column to get the average
dollar value of purchases,
I use the average function,
also on the price column.
To get this aggregate by product,
I'll include then on this query
using the group by statement.
Here, I select the product as the grouping
field then my three aggregate functions as
aggregate fields I've added aliases for
each aggregate function so
the output data function makes sense.
I've called COUNT(*) PURCHASES,
the SUM(PRICE) TOTAL_SALES,
and the Average (Price) AVG_SALES.
I then have, FROM TRANSACTIONs,
and finally, I GROUP BY PRODUCT.
When I run this query I
get the following output.
Notice that the resulting data
set has one row per product,
with each of my aggregates as columns:
purchases, total sales, and average sales.
Now let's say I wanted to aggregate my
data, but I wanted to filter the output
data set in some way based on the values
of the aggregates themselves.
Previously when we wanted to filter
rows of data we used the where command.
But when we want to filter rows of
data after they have been aggregated
we use the having command.
The syntax for
the having command looks like this.
Everything is the same as for
the group by command, but
now I've added a having command
to the end of the query,
followed by some logical conditions
that qualify what to filter.
The logical conditions themselves are
basically the same as those we use with
the where command.
Except that all the fields I reference
are aggregate fields versus fields from
the source table.
Again, let's use an example
to illustrate how this works.
Let's start with the group, by example,
we just covered in the resulting data set.
Let's say that what I really wanted to
see was summary of all products that had
average sales greater than $10.
In the output, books and
DVDs each have average sales of
$14.95 which is greater than $10, but
magazines have sales $2.875 which
is not greater than $10 the query
to return only products with average
sales greater than $10 looks like this.
Again the query is the same as our group
by example except that I've added having
AVG_SALES greater than ten.
When I run this query,
I get the expected result.
Now I only have rows for books and DVDs.
You'll notice that you use the alias, AVG
underscore sales in this having clause.
Some SQL engines allow to use an alias
as an having statements others don't.
If alias were not allowed,
I will need to use the aggregate itself in
the having clause, in this case AVG price.
It is possible to use both
the where command and
the having command in the same query.
When I do this, I'm basically
filtering rows from the source table,
then aggregating using only
the rows I'm interested in.
The syntax looks like this.
Note that the where clause is right
after the from clause in my query,
just like it was in our example
from the previous video.
The having clause is still at the end.
Let's say I still wanted to aggregate
using products on my transactions table,
but I wanted to make sure I excluded data
from resellers and those aggregates.
I write a query that looks like this.
It's the same query from our having
example, except that I've added
where channel is not equal to
reseller after the from clause.
When I run this query,
I get the following data set.
The output looks very similar to our
having example, except that the purchases,
total sales, and average sales numbers for
DVDs have changed.
Since we filtered out
the reseller DVD transaction.
Okay, that's enough on aggregates for now.
The last command we're going to talk about
in this video is the order by command.
Recall that the older by commands
simply allows me to sort my
output data set by one or
more sorting fields.
For those of you familiar with Excel,
the functionality is similar to the custom
sort feature that allows ascending and
descending sorts based on
multiple columns of a table.
The syntax for
the order by command is straight forward.
I simply add order by to the end of my
query followed by a list of sorting fields
separated by commas the sort
order is the sending by default.
And the columns sorts sequences from
the left to right by the columns listed in
the statement.
In other words, the sort will be by
FIELD_i first then by the next field,
etc all the way to field end.
If I want the field to be
sorted in descending order,
I simply add DESC after the field I want
sorted that way, separated by a space.
One interesting thing to know is
that if I'm not aggravating data,
the sort can usually be done using
any field in the source table,
not just those fields contained
in the select statement.
When I am aggravating data,
the order by statement must be based on
the same elements there
in my select statement.
As a final example,
let say I just wanted to see my whole
transactions table sorted from
highest price to lowest price.
I use the following query.
Select star from transactions,
order by space desc.
I then get the following result.
As expected,
I see all rows from the transactions table
sorted from highest price to lowest price.
Note that in the case of sorting ties,
like the 2 transactions with a price of
9.95, the default order is the same order
that exists in the source database table.
Okay at this point we have covered
all the basic commands that we might
run against the database table.
We built on the select, from, and where
commands we covered in a prior video and
added the group by, having,
and order by commands.
You should now be able to write simply
queries to extract data from a database
table, aggregate data, sort data, and
rename data using column aliases.
In later videos, we'll talk about how
to extract data from multiple tables,
and some more advanced
types of SQL queries.